
Exploring the Benefits of Augmented Reality Documentation for Maintenance and Repair Steven Henderson, Student Member, IEEE, and Steven Feiner, Member, IEEE
Abstract—We explore the development of an experimental augmented reality application that provides benefits to professional mechanics performing maintenance and repair tasks in a field setting. We developed a prototype that supports military mechanics conducting routine maintenance tasks inside an armored vehicle turret, and evaluated it with a user study. Our prototype uses a tracked headworn display to augment a mechanic’s natural view with text, labels, arrows, and animated sequences designed to facilitate task comprehension, localization, and execution. A within-subject controlled user study examined professional military mechanics using our system to complete 18 common tasks under field conditions. These tasks included installing and removing fasteners and indicator lights, and connecting cables, all within the cramped interior of an armored personnel carrier turret. An augmented reality condition was tested against two baseline conditions: the same headworn display providing untracked text and graphics and a fixed flat panel display representing an improved version of the laptop-based documentation currently employed in practice. The augmented reality condition allowed mechanics to locate tasks more quickly than when using either baseline, and in some instances, resulted in less overall head movement. A qualitative survey showed that mechanics found the augmented reality condition intuitive and satisfying for the tested sequence of tasks.
Index Terms—Industrial, military, user interfaces, virtual and augmented reality. Ç
  1 INTRODUCTION
MAINTENANCE and repair operations represent an inter- esting and opportunity-filled problem domain for the application of augmented reality (AR). The majority of activities in this domain are conducted by trained main- tenance personnel applying established procedures to documented designs in relatively static and predictable environments. These procedures are typically organized into sequences of quantifiable tasks targeting a particular item in a specific location. These characteristics and others form a well-defined design space, conducive to a variety of systems and technologies that could assist a mechanic in performing maintenance.
Such assistance is desirable, even for the most experi- enced mechanics, for several reasons. First, navigating and performing maintenance and repair procedures imposes significant physical requirements on a mechanic. For each task within a larger procedure, a mechanic must first move their body, neck, and head to locate and orient to the task. The mechanic must then perform additional physical movement to carry out the task. Assistance optimizing these physical movements can save a mechanic time and energy. Such savings can be significant when performing dozens of potentially unfamiliar tasks distributed across a large, complex system. Second, navigating and performing
. The authors are with the Department of Computer Science, Computer Graphics and User Interfaces Lab, Columbia University, 500 W. 120th St., 450 CS Building, New York, NY 10027.
E-mail: {henderso, feiner}@cs.columbia.edu.
Manuscript received 9 Feb. 2010; revised 12 May 2010; accepted 12 June 2010; published online 29 Oct. 2010.
Recommended for acceptance by G. Klinker, T. Ho ̈llerer, H. Saito,
and O. Bimber.
For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: tvcg@computer.org, and reference IEEECS Log Number TVCGSI-2010-02-0039.
Digital Object Identifier no. 10.1109/TVCG.2010.245.
maintenance and repair procedures impose cognitive requirements. A mechanic must first spatially frame each task in a presumed model of the larger environment, and map its location to the physical world. The mechanic must then correctly interpret and comprehend the tasks. Effective assistance in these instances can also save the mechanic time while reducing mental workload.
In this article, which includes deeper analysis of our earlier work [15], we explore how AR can provide various forms of assistance to mechanics during maintenance and repair tasks. We begin with a review of related work and a cognitive framework for maintenance and repair assistance. Next, we describe the design and user testing of a prototype AR application (Figs. 1 and 2) for assisting mechanics in navigating realistic and challenging repair sequences inside the cramped interior of an armored vehicle turret. Our application uses AR to enhance localization in standard maintenance scenarios with on-screen instructions, atten- tion-directing symbols, overlaid labels, context-setting 2D and 3D graphics, and animated models. This information is combined with a mechanic’s natural view of the main- tenance task in a tracked see-through headworn display (HWD) and is primarily designed to help the mechanic locate and begin various tasks. Our contributions include a domain-specific user study examining professional me- chanics using our system to maintain actual equipment in a field setting. Our user study demonstrates how mechanics performing maintenance sequences under an AR condition were able to locate tasks more quickly than when using two baseline conditions. We also document specific instances when the AR condition allowed mechanics to perform tasks with less overall head movement than when using these baselines. Finally, we convey the qualitative insights of these professional mechanics with regard to the intuitive- ness, ease of use, and acceptability of our approach.

 Fig. 1. A mechanic in our user study, wearing an AR display and wristworn control panel, performs a maintenance task inside an LAV- 25A1 armored personnel carrier.
2 RELATED WORK
There has been much interest in applying AR to main- tenance tasks. This interest is reflected in the formation of several collaborative research consortiums specifically dedicated to the topic—ARVIKA [12], Services and Training through Augmented Reality (STAR) [24], and ARTESAS [2]. These and other efforts have resulted in a sizable body of work, much of which is surveyed by Ong et al. [22].
The majority of related work focuses on specific subsets of the domain, which we categorize here as activities involving the inspection, testing, servicing, alignment, installation, removal, assembly, repair, overhaul, or rebuilding of hu- man-made systems [37]. Within this categorization, assem- bly tasks have received the most attention. Caudell and Mizell [6] proposed a seminal AR prototype to assist in assembling aircraft wire bundles. Subsequent field testing of this system by Curtis et al. [8] found the prototype performed as well as baseline techniques, but faced several practical and
acceptance challenges. Reiners et al. [25] demonstrated a prototype AR system that featured a tracked monocular optical see-through (OST) HWD presenting instructions for assembling a car door. Baird and Barfield [4] showed that users presented with screen-fixed instructions on untracked monocular OST and opaque HWDs completed a computer motherboard assembly task more quickly than when using fixed displays or paper manuals.
Tang et al. [34] studied the effectiveness of AR in assembling toy blocks and found users made fewer dependent errors when aided by registered instructions displayed with a tracked stereoscopic OST HWD, compared to traditional media. An experiment by Robertson et al. [26] discovered that subjects assembled toy blocks more quickly while viewing registered instructions on a tracked biocular video see-through (VST) HWD than when using nonregis- tered variants. Zauner et al. [40] demonstrated a prototype system for employing AR in a furniture assembly task. Qualitative studies by Nilsson and Johansson for a medical assembly task [20] and by Salonen and Sa ̈a ̈ski for 3D puzzle assembly [28] suggest strong user support for AR.
Additional work outside the assembly domain includes Feiner et al.’s knowledge-based AR maintenance prototype [11], which used a tracked monocular OST HWD to present instructions for servicing a laser printer. Ockermann and Pritchett [21] studied pilots performing preflight aircraft inspections while following instructions presented on an untracked OST HWD. The results of this study demonstrated an undesired overreliance on computer-generated instruc- tions. Smailagic and Siewiorek [33] designed a collaborative wearable computer system that displayed maintenance instructions on an untracked opaque HWD. Schwald and Laval [29] proposed a prototype hardware and software framework for supporting a wide range of maintenance categories with AR. Kno ̈ pfle et al. [17] developed a prototype AR application and corresponding authoring tool to assist mechanics in removing and installing components, plugs, and fasteners. Platonov et al. [23] developed a similar proof- of-concept system featuring markerless tracking.
 Fig. 2. (Left) A mechanic wearing a tracked headworn display removes a bolt from a component inside an LAV-25A1 armored personnel carrier turret. (Right) The AR condition in the study: A view through the headworn display captured in a similar domain depicts information provided using AR to assist the mechanic. (The view through the headworn display for the LAV-25A1 domain was not cleared for publication due to security restrictions, necessitating the substitution of images from an alternative domain throughout this paper.)


There is also notable work on the general task of localizing a user’s attention in AR. Feiner et al. [11] used a 3D rubberband line drawn from a screen-fixed label to a possibly offscreen target object or location. Biocca et al. developed the “Attention Funnel” [5], a vector tunnel drawn to a target, similar to “tunnel-in-the-sky” aviation cockpit head-up displays, and showed that it reduced search time compared to world-fixed labels or audible cues. To ̈nnis and Klinker [35] demonstrated that an egocentrically aligned screen-fixed 3D arrow projected in AR was faster at directing a car driver’s attention than an exocentric alternative. Wither et al. [39] compared the performance of various displays to support visual search for text in AR (a task supported by localization), but did not detect any significant differences between display conditions. Schwerdtfeger and Klinker [30], [31] studied AR attention-directing techniques to help users find and pick objects from stockroom storage bins. Their frame-based technique outperformed static 3D arrows and variants of the Attention Funnel.
Two aspects of our contributions distinguish them from this previous work. First, other than the wire bundle assembly research conducted by Curtis et al. [8], our research is the only project we know of to include a quantitative study of professional users employing AR for maintenance tasks under field conditions. Our work differs from the wire bundle assembly research by examining a more diverse set of maintenance tasks (including inspec- tion, alignment, removal, and installation) in a more restrictive environment using different comparison condi- tions. Second, our work is the first within the maintenance domain that articulates the potential benefits of AR for reducing head movement.
3 COGNITIVE DESIGN GUIDELINES
Two projects fundamentally influenced the design of our AR prototype. The first of these, by Neumann and Majoros [19], proposes that manufacturing and maintenance activ- ities fall into two classes: those focusing mainly on the cognitive, or informational, aspects of a maintenance task, and those focusing on the psychomotor, or workpiece, aspects of a task. Example informational phase activities include directing attention (localization), comprehending instructions, and transposing information from instructions to the physical task environment. Workpiece phase activ- ities include comparing, aligning, adjusting, and other forms of physical manipulation. Based on our observations of professional mechanics operating in a variety of settings, we believe AR applications designed for maintenance and repair tasks should seek to provide specific assistance in both phases. Moreover, we suspect that the types of assistance offered in each phase are distinct. Therefore, we have structured our research (and this article) accordingly.
The second project influencing our prototype proposed a set of design principles for assembly instruction. Heiser et al. [14] derived eight principles for visualizing processes over time from observing and surveying users assembling a small television stand. These heuristics extend earlier use of some of these heuristics in automated generation of graphics and AR [10], [11], [32]. As described in Section 4.1, we sought to adhere to this set of principles in designing the user interface for our software prototype.
4 INFORMATIONAL PHASE PROTOTYPE
We developed a hardware and software architecture for studying AR applications for maintenance. This architec- ture allowed us to implement a prototype focusing on the informational phases of tasks that we evaluated through the user study described in Section 4.3. We note that our prototype is a laboratory proof-of-concept system for exploring the potential benefits of AR for supporting maintenance procedures under field conditions, but is not a production-ready implementation. Therefore, our soft- ware and hardware choices did not have to reflect the needs of a production environment. We have used our prototype to study United States Marine Corps (USMC) mechanics operating inside the turret of an LAV-25A1 armored personnel carrier. The LAV-25 (of which the LAV-25A1 is a variant) is a light wheeled military vehicle, and the turret portion is a revolving two-person enclosed, cockpit-like station in the middle of the vehicle. The entire turret volume is approximately 1 cubic meter, but much electrical, pneumatic, hydraulic, and mechanical infrastructure en- croaches from a myriad of directions and in close proximity to the crew’s operating space. A mechanic servicing the turret works while sitting in one of two seats that are each fixed along the longitudinal axis of the turret. The resulting work area is approximately 0.34 cubic meters and spans the entire area surrounding the mechanic.
Because we did not have regular access to the vehicle, we used an extensive set of 3D laser scans to create a mostly virtual mockup of the turret, which we used in our lab during development. We then finalized our design in an actual turret in two separate pilot tests prior to the user study in the real turret. The first pilot test involved prototype testing with users at the Marine Corps Logistics Base in Albany, Georgia. This allowed us to refine our design and gather user feedback about our interface. The second pilot test involved four mechanics from the population recruited for the user study described in Section 4.3. These mechanics experienced nearly the same test procedure as other participants, but their data were excluded after we modified two tasks to reduce the overall execution time of our experiment.
4.1 Software
Our AR application software was developed as a game engine “mod” using the Valve Source Engine Software Development Kit. The engine “player” serves as a virtual proxy for the user and is positioned by location information from the tracking hardware. All virtual content in the AR scene is provided by custom game engine models, GUI elements, and other components. Full resolution stereo video from two Point Gray Firefly MV cameras is stretched to the scene back buffer via an external DLL that hooks the game engine’s instance of the DirectX graphics interface via the Windows Detours library. The entire scene is rendered in stereo at 800   600 resolution with an average frame rate of 75 fps. (The effective video frame rate is approximately 25 fps, due to software upscaling of the stereo images from 2   640   480to2 800 600.)
At any given point in time, the application assumes a state representing a particular task (e.g., toggling a switch) within a larger maintenance sequence (e.g., remove an


 Fig. 3. A typical localization sequence in our prototype. (a) A screen-fixed arrow indicates the shortest rotation distance to target. (b) As the user orients on the target, a semitransparent 3D arrow points to the target. (c) As the user reaches the target, the 3D arrow begins a gradual fade to full transparency. (d) When the arrow has completely faded, a brief highlighting effect marks the precise target location.
assembly). For each task, the application provides five forms of augmented content to assist the mechanic:
1. Attention-directing information in the form of 3D and 2D arrows.
2. Text instructions describing the task and accompa- nying notes and warnings.
3. Registered labels showing the location of the target component and surrounding context.
4. A close-up view depicting a 3D virtual scene centered on the target at close range and rendered on a 2D screen-fixed panel.
5. 3D models of tools (e.g., a screwdriver) and turret components (e.g., fasteners or larger components), if applicable, registered at their current or projected locations in the environment.
Attention-directing graphics follow a general sequence (Fig. 3) that depends on 6DOF user head pose. If the target component is behind the mechanic, a screen-fixed green arrow points the user in the shortest rotational direction to the target. Once the target is within   90 degree (yaw) of the user’s line of sight, a tapered red semitransparent 3D arrow appears, directing the user toward the target. The tail of the arrow is smoothly adjusted and placed along the far edge of the display at each frame, based on the vector between the target and the user’s projected line of sight on the near clipping plane. This ensures that the arrow provides a sufficient cross section for discernment. As the user approaches the target, the arrow increases in transparency and eventually disappears and spawns a highlighting effect for five seconds at the location of the target. Depending on task preferences and settings, the 3D arrow will reengage if the angle between the user’s head azimuth and the direction to target exceeds 30 degree.
For more complex or potentially ambiguous tasks, animated 3D models are added to the user’s view. These animations show the correct movement of tools or components required to accomplish a particular task. For example, when mechanics are instructed to remove or install fasteners, animated tools demonstrate the correct tool motion to accomplish the task, as shown in Fig. 2, right. Animation sequences are controlled and synchronized so they begin when the 3D arrow disappears, and play for a finite period of time (five seconds).
If a mechanic wishes to replay an animated sequence or control its speed, they can use a wireless wristworn controller, shown in Fig. 1, which serves as the primary means for manually interacting with the user interface of
our prototype. The controller uses a custom 2D interface application written using the Android SDK, and provides forward and back buttons that allow the mechanic to navigate between maintenance tasks. When viewing tasks with supporting animation, additional buttons and a slider are provided to start, stop, and control the speed of animated sequences. These animation buttons are hidden for nonanimated tasks.
As described in Section 3, we leveraged previously published design heuristics [10], [11], [14], [32] in develop- ing the user interface for our software prototype. Based on our experience with our prototype, we highlight several heuristics discussed by Heiser et al. [14] that we feel are particularly crucial to the successful application of AR for maintenance and repair. The first of these is the importance of displaying one diagram for each major step. As shown in earlier work and in our prototype, AR can populate a mechanic’s natural view of a task with a large variety of virtual content. A potential challenge lies in scoping and organizing this content to preserve the notion of separable and easy to comprehend “major steps.” In our prototype, we strived to maintain a manageable task structure by displaying text instructions and close-up views (as shown Fig. 3) similar to what appear in paper manuals, and also allowing the mechanic to control the progression of steps with the wristworn controller.
A second important heuristic highlights the use of arrows and guidelines to indicate action (e.g., attachment, alignment, and removal). While our interface has the ability to display such information using registered 3D models (e.g., Fig. 2, right) such models were limited in our prototype to showing the position of tools or major turret components. As we summarize in Section 5, we feel future applications of AR should seek greater use of arrows and guides in the workpiece portion of certain tasks.
Two additional important and related heuristics govern- ing the design of interfaces for maintenance and repair tasks emphasize showing stable orientations in a manner that is physically realizable, while avoiding changing viewpoints. The use of AR for maintenance and repair can implicitly promote these heuristics by providing a unified in situ view of both an assigned task environment and its accompanying instructional content. This is demonstrated in our prototype by the use of tracked 3D models and labels depicting components in starting, transient, and target orientations, as specified by certain tasks. Likewise, other 3D models show suggested tool orientations and movements.


4.2 Hardware
We experimented with two HWDs while developing our prototype. The display we eventually used for user trials (Fig. 1) is a custom-built stereo VST HWD constructed from a Headplay 800   600 resolution color stereo gaming display with a 34-degree diagonal field of view (FOV). We mounted two Point Gray Firefly MV 640   480 resolution cameras to the front of the HWD, which were connected to a shared IEEE 1394a bus on the PC. The cameras are equipped with 5 mm microlenses and capture at 30 fps. This application executes on a PC running Windows XP Pro, with an NVIDIA Quadro 4500 graphics card. We also experimented with, and initially intended to use, an NVIS nVisor ST color stereo OST HWD. We selected this display because of its bright 1;280   1;024 resolution graphics, 60 degree diagonal FOV, and high transmissivity. However, during pilot testing, we discovered that vehicle assemblies located directly in front of and behind the seats prevented users from moving their head freely while wearing the relatively large nVisor HWD. This necessitated use of our custom-built HWD in the user study.
Tracking is provided by a NaturalPoint OptiTrack tracking system. The turret’s restricted tracking volume and corresponding occluding structures created a noncon- vex and limited standoff tracking volume, which led us to employ 10 tracking cameras to achieve ample coverage. Because we were focused on research, rather than practical deployment, we were not concerned with the disadvan- tages of adding a large number of cameras to the existing turret. In contrast, future production-ready AR mainte- nance systems might instead use cameras and other sensors built into the task environment or worn by the maintainer, possibly in conjunction with detailed environment models.
The OptiTrack system typically uses passive retrore- flective markers illuminated by IR sources in each camera. During pilot testing, we discovered that numerous metallic surfaces inside the turret created spurious reflections. Although we were able to control for all of these with camera exposure settings or by establishing masked regions in each camera, these efforts greatly reduced tracking performance. Therefore, we adopted an active marker setup, using three IR LEDs arranged in an asymmetric triangle on the HWD. Given the confined space inside the turret, we were concerned that a worker’s head position could potentially move closer than the 0.6 meter minimum operating range of the OptiTrack. However, experimenta- tion revealed that, for any point inside our work area, at least four cameras could view a user’s head from beyond this minimum operating range. Moreover, the active marker setup prevented the possibility of IR light from cameras reflecting off the user’s head at close range. The tracking software streams tracking data at 60 Hz to the PC running the AR application over a dedicated gigabit ethernet connection. The tracking application runs on an Alienware M17 notebook running Windows Vista, with an additional enhanced USB controller PC Card.
We implemented our wristworn controller using an Android G1 phone (Fig. 1). The device displays a simple set of 2D controls and detects user gestures made on a touch screen. These gestures are streamed to the PC running the
Fig. 4. Example screen shot from the currently used IETM interface.
AR application over an 802.11g link. The mechanic attaches the device to either wrist using a set of Velcro bracelets.
4.3 Informational Phase User Study
We designed a user study to compare the performance and general acceptance of our prototype (the AR condition) to that of an enhanced version of the system currently used by USMC mechanics. We also included an untracked version of our prototype in the study as a control for HWD confounds. Six participants (all male), ages 18-28, were recruited from a recent class of graduates of the USMC Light Wheeled Mechanic Course in Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland. Each graduate had minimal experience with maintenance tasks inside the turret of the LAV-25A1, which is only featured in a two-hour introductory block of instruction during the course. Participants categorized their computer experience as having no experience (one participant), monthly experience (one participant), weekly experience (one participant), daily experience (two participants) or using computers multiple times per day (one participant). Participants categorized their experience level with mechan- ical systems as either a basic level of experience (two participants), having some experience (two participants), or very experienced (two participants). We note that the participants’ recent status as students studying maintenance under instructors with many years of experience might have led to underreported mechanical experience levels. Two participants identified themselves as requiring contact lenses or glasses, and both determined that the separate left and right eye focus adjustments on the HWD provided adequate correction. All participants were right-handed.
4.3.1 Baseline Comparison Technique
In our experiment, we wanted to compare our prototype against current techniques used by USMC mechanics while performing maintenance task sequences. These techniques principally involve the use of an Interactive Electronic Technical Manual (IETM) [1], a 2D software application deployed on a portable notebook computer carried and referenced by mechanics while completing tasks. IETM users browse electronic documents in portable document format (PDF) using a specialized reader, an example of which is shown in Fig. 4.
We felt that a comparison against this system would not be compelling for several reasons. First, the extra time required to navigate this software, which affords less user
 

 TABLE 1
Selected Tasks (with Descriptions Expurgated for Publication) and Corresponding Pitch and Azimuth Measured from 0.7 Meters above the Center of the Left Turret Seat
 Fig. 5. LCD condition.
control than common PDF readers, is significant. Second, the perspective views featured in the software are drawn from arbitrary locations and contain minimal context, which requires users to browse multiple pages with the suboptimal interface. As a result, any task completion or localization metrics would be heavily influenced by the time required to negotiate the IETM interface.
Therefore, we designed and adopted an improved version of the IETM interface to use as a baseline in the study. This baseline (the LCD condition) features static 3D scenes presented on a 19’’ LCD monitor. The monitor was fixed to the right of the mechanic (who sat in the left seat of the turret during our experiment), on an azimuth of roughly 90 degree to the mechanic’s forward-facing seated direction. The LCD was positioned and oriented to reflect how mechanics naturally arrange IETM notebook computers while working from the left seat. During each task, the LCD presents a single static 3D rendered scene. Each static scene, such as the example shown in Fig. 5, is rendered using the same engine that generates virtual content for the AR condition and depicts identical text instructions, 3D labels, close-up graphics, and animated sequences (if applicable). Additional 3D models are added to the scene to depict the central component of interest, as well as important surrounding context. For each task, static perspective views were chosen that generally correspond to how each scene would naturally appear to a user sitting in the left seat. The FOV for each scene in the LCD condition was widened to 50 degree to approximate the perspectives used in IETMs. When experiencing the LCD condition during the user study, mechanics control the displayed scene by manip- ulating the system state with the wristworn controller.
To control for the general effects of wearing a HWD, we added a third condition featuring an untracked version of our AR prototype. This HUD (head-up display) condition uses screen-fixed graphics that depict text instructions and close- up views identical to those in the AR condition. However, no localization aids or 3D models were provided with this condition. While experiencing the HUD condition, partici- pants wear the same OST HWD worn in the AR condition, and interact with the application using the same wristworn controller used in both the AR and LCD conditions.
4.3.2 Tasks
We selected 18 representative maintenance tasks for inclusion in the user study, from among candidates listed in the operator’s manual for the vehicle [38]. Table 1 summarizes the selected set of tasks, and Fig. 6 shows their approximate arrangement inside the turret. These tasks serve as individual steps (e.g., removing a screw, as shown in Fig. 1) performed as part of a larger maintenance sequence (e.g., replacing a pump). We specifically avoided adopting an established sequence of tasks to mitigate experiential influences in the experiment. We selected tasks that a trained mechanic could perform while sitting in the left seat, and which could each be reasonably completed in
 Fig. 6. Approximate task azimuths and distances as viewed from above the turret and looking down. Neighboring task identifiers are separated by commas.


under five minutes. We also sought to include a diversity of tasks representing various strata within the larger spectrum of maintenance operations [37].
4.3.3 Procedure
A within-subject, repeated measures design was used, consisting of three conditions (AR, LCD, and HUD) and 18 maintenance tasks. The experiment lasted approximately 75 minutes and was divided into three blocks, with a short break between blocks. Each block consisted of all 18 tasks for each condition. Block order was counterbalanced across participants using a Latin square approach to create a strongly balanced design. The task order within blocks was fixed, with the participants experiencing the same tasks in the same location across all three conditions. We addressed potential learning effects by selecting 18 disparate tasks that were not part of any existing repair sequence, to prevent memorization of task order. Before each block, the participant was shown how to wear the equipment used in each particular condition. In the AR and HUD conditions, this consisted of fitting and focusing the HWD, with an additional brief calibration step for the AR condition. In this step, the user was instructed to align two crosshairs tracked by the OptiTrack with two corresponding 3D crosshairs registered at known points in the turret and tracked with fiducial markers. The observer then used keyboard inputs to manually align the transformation between the turret’s coordinate system and that of the HWD (as worn by a particular user) while observing video of the AR scene. Although this procedure was accurate enough given our choice of tasks, it could be improved by employing a more robust calibration technique, such as the one proposed by Rolland et al. [27] and recently implemented by Jones et al. [16]. For the LCD condition, participants donned a light- weight headband affixed with IR LEDs to facilitate the collection of tracking data. No portion of this apparatus entered the participant’s field of view during the experi- ment. We also note that this tracking approach did not feature any eye-tracking capability and assumes the participant’s gaze is coincident with their head orientation. During the experiment, we did notice some mechanics glancing at the LCD from oblique angles though this activity appeared to be confined to natural eye motion exhibiting during reading. Future studies should attempt to incorporate these finer gaze patterns into comparison of display conditions.
Before each block, each participant was afforded an opportunity to rehearse the condition using five practice tasks until they felt comfortable. Tools and fasteners required for tasks within the block were arrayed on a flat waist-high structure to the right of the seat and their locations highlighted to the participant.
The timed portion of the block consisted of 18 trial tasks distributed throughout the mechanic’s work area. Each trial began when the mechanic pressed the “next” button on the wristworn controller. This started the overall task comple- tion timer, and triggered the presentation of instructional text, close-up views, and labels associated with the trial task. In the AR condition, cueing information (i.e., the red or green arrow) was simultaneously activated, prompting the user to locate the target. The localization time was recorded
when the user positioned their head such that the target location entered and remained within a 200 pixel radius of the center of the display for more than one second. In the AR and HUD conditions, a crosshair was displayed to the participant to remind them to center each target. In the LCD condition, which presented static VR scenes for each task during the experiment, collected tracking data were replayed in a discrete event simulation after the experiment to calculate the localization time. Following target localiza- tion, overall task completion timing continued until the mechanic gestured on the wristworn controller for the next task. The block then proceeded to the next task until the participant experienced all 18 tasks.
4.4
4.4.1
Informational Phase Study Results
Data Preparation
We performed several preprocessing steps prior to analyz- ing our results. First, because the tracker coordinate system was centered above the left camera of our VST HWD, we translated tracking data points to a position coincident with the center of rotation for the participant’s head. This was accomplished by adding a small offset vector v to each reading, where v was estimated by combining HWD measurements with population-specific anthropometric data from Donelson and Gordon [9] and supplemented by Paquette and colleagues [13].
We then removed spurious points in the recorded tracking and completion time data sets. For tracking data, we applied a moving average filter as defined by Law and Kelton [18]. After some experimenting, we selected a window size of 0.25 seconds, which was applied to all six degrees of freedom. For completion time data, we manually inspected the task completion time stamps that were triggered when the subject gestured for the next task using the wristworn controller. In several instances, subjects made accidental double gestures, then immediately (usually within two seconds) gestured on the “back” button to reload the appropriate task. We identified and removed eight of these instances.
Our final data preparation step involved normalizing position and orientation data for each subject. Because the HWD was worn differently by each user, the relative position and orientation of the tracker to tasks in the experiment varies by subject. To standardize all subjects to a common reference frame, we individually normalized each subject’s position and orientation data, as suggested by Axholt et al. [3].
4.4.2 Order Effects
We performed an analysis to check for order effects in our study. We applied a 3 (Presentation Order)  18 (Task) repeated measure ANOVA on both task localization and completion time and with our participants as the random variable. Presentation order failed to exhibit a significant main effect on localization time (Fð2;34Þ 1⁄4 0:039; p 1⁄4 0:962) or completion time (Fð2;34Þ 1⁄4 0:917; p 1⁄4 0:431). Based on these results, and given our small sample size, we note more work is required to draw any conclusions about how order effects impacted our experiment design.


  Fig. 7. Task completion times (seconds) for AR, HUD, and LCD. An asterisk marks the mean task completion time for each condition.
4.4.3 Completion Time Analysis
We applied a 3 (Display Condition)  18 (Task) repeated measure ANOVA to task completion time with our participants as the random variable. Using   1⁄4 0:05 as our criterion for significance, the display condition had a significant main effect on completion time (Fð2;34Þ 1⁄4 5:252; p1⁄40:028). The mean task completion times for each condition were 42.0 seconds (AR), 55.2 seconds (HUD), and 34.5 seconds (LCD) and are shown as asterisks in the Tukey box-and-whisker [7] plots in Fig. 7. Post hoc comparison with Bonferroni correction (  1⁄4 0:05) revealed mean task completion time under the AR condition was 76 percent that of the HUD condition, which was not significant (p 1⁄4 0:331). Mean task completion time under the LCD condition was 82 percent that of the AR condition (not significant, p 1⁄4 0:51), and 63 percent of that of the HUD condition (not significant, p 1⁄4 0:123). The set of mainte- nance tasks used in the study had a significant main effect on completion time (Fð17;34Þ 1⁄4 8:063; p < 0:001), which we expected, given the varying levels of effort required to perform each task.
4.4.4 Localization Time Analysis
We applied a 3 (Display Condition)  18 (Task) repeated measure ANOVA on task localization time with our participants as the random variable. Display condition exhibited a significant main effect on localization time (Fð2;34Þ 1⁄4 42:444; p < 0:001). The mean task localization times were 4.9 seconds (AR), 11.1 seconds (HUD), and 9.2 seconds (LCD), as shown in Fig. 8. Post hoc comparison with Bonferroni correction (  1⁄4 0:05) revealed that mean localization time under the AR condition was 44 percent that of the HUD condition, which was statistically sig- nificant (p 1⁄4 0:001) and 53 percent that of the LCD condition, which was also statistically significant (p 1⁄4 0:007). LCD mean localization time was 83 percent that of HUD, which was not statistically significant (p 1⁄4 0:085). The particular set of selected maintenance tasks used in the study failed to exhibit a significant main effect on localization time (Fð2;34Þ 1⁄4 1:533; p 1⁄4 0:103).
4.4.5 Error Analysis
Errors in our experiment were defined as instances when a subject performed a task to completion on the wrong item, and were logged by the observer during the experiment.
Fig. 8. Task localization times (seconds) for AR, HUD, and LCD. An asterisk marks the mean task localization time for each condition.
Examples of errors included toggling an incorrect switch, removing an incorrect bolt, or inspecting the wrong item. In general, we found mechanics made few errors, and confirmed this with a 3 (Display Condition)  18 (Task) repeated measure ANOVA on task errors with our participants as the random variable. Display condition did not exhibit a significant main effect on total errors (Fð2;34Þ 1⁄4 1:00; p 1⁄4 0:410). This corroborates earlier findings by Robertson et al. [26].
4.4.6 Head Movement Analysis
Our analysis of head movement focused on the range of head rotation, rotational exertion and velocity, and transla- tional exertion and velocity. This analysis was confined to only the localization portion of each task, because it was difficult to isolate head movements from overall body motion during the hands-on portion of some tasks. In these tasks, the user remained relatively static during localization, but adopted many different body poses once they began the physical portion of the task.
A review of descriptive statistics for overall ranges in head rotation about each axis revealed left and right head rotation about the neck (yaw) was the greatest source of rotational movement, and generally conforms to the relative task azimuths shown in Table 1. A comparison of ranges by task, shown in Fig. 9, provides a more revealing picture of the effect of display condition on head yaw. It should be noted that the range information includes transient head movements between tasks and, thus, intervals are not necessarily centered on the target task.
Rotational head exertion during each task was estimated for each participant by summing the change in head pitch, yaw, and roll Euler angles at each interval of the recorded data. Rotational velocity during each task was calculated for each participant by dividing this total rotational exertion in each axis by the time required to locate the task. Table 2 summarizes these statistics. A 3 (Display Condition)  18 (Task) repeated measure ANOVA was performed separately for each statistic along each axis, with participants as the random variable. In this analysis, display condition had a significant effect on pitch exertion (Fð2;34Þ 1⁄4 12:206; p 1⁄4 0:002), roll exertion (Fð2;34Þ 1⁄4 34:496; p < 0:001), and yaw exertion (Fð2;34Þ 1⁄4 32:529; p < 0:001). Post hoc compar- isons with Bonferroni correction (  1⁄4 0:05) are summarized in Table 2. For rotational velocity, display condition had a


  Fig. 9. Ranges of head rotation (degrees yaw) for all participants across each task. Tasks are stacked in layers. Each task layer shows ranges for AR (bottom), HUD (middle), and LCD (top).
significant main effect on mean pitch velocity (Fð2;34Þ 1⁄4 12:205; p 1⁄4 0:002), mean roll velocity (Fð2;34Þ 1⁄4 48:875; p < 0:001), and mean yaw velocity (Fð2;34Þ 1⁄4 44:191; p < 0:001). Table 2 captures the post hoc comparisons of means with Bonferroni correction (  1⁄4 0:05).
Translational head exertion during each task was estimated for each participant by summing the change in euclidean distance exhibited between each interval of the recorded data. The result represents the total euclidean distances the head traveled during localization. A 3 (Dis- play Condition)  18 (Task) repeated measure ANOVA test revealed a significant main effect of display condition on translational exertion (Fð2;34Þ 1⁄4 17:467; p 1⁄4 0:001). The mean translational head exertions were 0.25 meters (AR), 0.36 me- ters (HUD), and 0.68 meters (LCD). Post hoc comparisons of mean translational exertion with Bonferroni correction revealed that exertion exhibited with the AR display was 69 percent that of HUD (not statistically significant, p 1⁄4 0:432), and 37 percent that of LCD, which was statistically significant (p 1⁄4 0:022). HUD exertion was 53 percent that of LCD, which was statistically significant (p 1⁄4 0:01). This reduction in head exertion is further depicted in the 2D histogram heat maps of Fig. 10. The heat maps depict normalized head positions for all users across all tasks and reflect a larger overall area required for head movement in the LCD condition.
Translational head velocity was estimated for each participant by dividing total translational head exertion during task localization by the time required to locate the task. A 3 (Display Condition)  18 (Task) repeated measure ANOVA test revealed a significant main effect of display condition on translational velocity (Fð2;34Þ 1⁄4 19:907; p < 0:001). The mean translational head velocities were 0.05 meters/second (AR), 0.03 meters/second (HUD), and 0.08 meters/second (LCD). Post hoc comparisons of means
TABLE 2
Rotational and Translation Exertions and Velocities
with Bonferroni correction revealed that the AR display condition maintained a translation velocity 1.6 times that of the HUD condition, which was not statistically significant (p 1⁄4 0:057). The LCD translational velocity was 1.7 times that of the AR display condition, which was not statistically significant (p 1⁄4 0:09), and 2.7 times that of the HUD condition, which was statistically significant (p 1⁄4 0:007).
4.4.7 Supporting Task Focus
We employed several methods to analyze how well each condition supported a mechanic’s ability to remain focused on a particular task versus looking elsewhere (e.g., referen- cing a manual or IETM). Quantifying a mechanic’s ability to sustain physical and cognitive focus on his or her current task is an important research question in the maintenance and repair domain. Breaking this focus can prolong the length of the repair. In addition to incurring more time to move his or her head, the mechanic will also require time to shift their mental model of the task from what they see physically to what they interpret in any referenced documentation. This interpretation process could poten- tially involve several nontrivial steps: visually searching images to identify features of interest, matching these features to points in the real world, mentally transforming objects from the documentation’s perspective to the real world, and memorizing supporting information such as warnings or instructions.
The first method we employed to examine support for task focus involved estimating the Distance from Center Point (DFCP) for each task, as defined by Axholt et al. [3]. This measure reflects the average angular distance a tracked body deviates about a reference point. In our experiment, the DFCP reference point is the vector between the participant’s predominant head pose and each of the 18 evaluated tasks. With this definition, DFCP provides an indicator of the level of focus maintained by each mechanic during each assigned task while experiencing each condition.

  Fig. 10. 2D Histograms shown as heatmaps of normalized head positions (viewed from above the turret looking down) across all users and tasks for AR (top) HUD (center) and LCD (bottom). The scale represents the relative number of hits in each bin of a 150   150 grid covering the task area. Bin sizes are 0.004 m (X) and 0.003 m (Y).
We calculated DFCP for each subject under all combina- tions of tasks and display conditions by first defining a center direction. We estimated this center direction due to variations in HWD boresight and because participants viewed tasks from possibly different poses. For the AR and HUD display conditions, we defined this center direction as the mean normalized orientation (pitch and yaw) exhibited by participants during each task. We included data from the entire completion interval in this calculation to provide sufficient sampling for isolation of the task’s principal viewing direction. In the case of the LCD display
Fig. 11. Distribution of normalized yaw angles for AR and LCD for Task T4. In each plot, the value x 1⁄4 0 indicates the population’s mean yaw orientation.
condition, the mean yaw component of head orientation was not expected to serve as an accurate estimate because each participant alternated between looking at the task and looking at the LCD. Therefore, an additional step was required to identify the principal viewing direction. This involved examining the distribution of normalized yaw angles to estimate the primary direction to each task. This analysis revealed a distinctive bimodal distribution for tasks compared to corresponding distributions in normal- ized yaw for the AR and HUD conditions. An example of the comparison is shown in Fig. 11. We isolated the direction to each task in the LCD condition by manually selecting the local optima in each distribution correspond- ing to each task’s relative location in the turret. This allowed us to disambiguate the local optima corresponding to the task from the local optima corresponding to the LCD.
After defining a center direction to each task, we next summed the distance from this central viewing vector to every pitch/yaw pair in the head tacking. We approximated these individual distances by calculating the composite vector formed by the intersection of each yaw and pitch angle on a unit sphere. Finally, we calculated DFCP by dividing the sum of each of these approximated distances by the number of samples. We applied a 3 (Display Condition)  18 (Task) repeated measure ANOVA to DFCP with our participants as the random variable. Display condition exhibited a significant main effect on localization time (Fð2;34Þ 1⁄4 1043:6; p < 0:001). The mean DFCP values were 0.183 meters (AR), 0.137 meters (HUD), and 0.703 meters (LCD). Post hoc comparison with Bonferroni correction (  1⁄4 0:05) revealed that HUD distance from center point was 0.75 times that of AR, which was not statistically significant (p 1⁄4 0:16). The AR distance from center point was 0.27 times that of LCD, which was significant (p < 0:001). The HUD distance from center point was 0.19 times that of LCD, which was also significant (p < 0:001).
The second method we employed in examining the amount of time a mechanic spent looking somewhere other than at the assigned task involved visually inspecting each subject’s head azimuth trajectory across the entire se- quence of 18 tasks. We began by first tracing the ideal head yaw trajectory over the entire sequence. This ideal trajectory assumes a mechanic will begin the repair sequence with his or her head oriented in the forward direction (0 degree azimuth).


  Fig. 12. Head orientation (yaw) trajectories for each use under AR and LCD conditions. The X-axis shows normalized elapsed time for each task, and the Y-axis shows rotational head displacement about the forward facing direction.
An ideal repair would then feature a mechanic moving his or her head systematically to each subsequent task azimuth (listed in Table 1), stopping at each location to complete the workpiece portion of the task. We next created similar plots for each participant that overlaid their yaw trajectories exhibited while completing the task sequence under each display condition. To synchronize the plots across all participants, we normalized time in each task interval for each participant according to the total time spent localizing and completing each task. The resultant plot, shown in Fig. 12, offers some interesting insights about potential interruptions in a mechanic’s task focus. Note, we elected to show only the AR and LCD yaw trajectories here, which were the most interesting, in order to promote readability (the characteristics of the omitted HUD trajec- tories roughly reflected those of the AR trajectory for each participant). An examination of the plot reflects a distinctive aperiodic pulse in the LCD yaw trajectory for each participant. This pulse, as confirmed by a careful review of video recorded during the experiment, reflects the moments during each task where the mechanic glanced at the LCD. We note it is difficult to statistically quantify this motion due to possible variations in the position of each mechanic’s head throughout the task. However, we believe the distinctive signal of the LCD trajectory roughly approximates the number of times the mechanic turned his head to glance at the LCD. Visually comparing the LCD yaw trajectories to those of AR appears to indicate the AR condition allowed mechanics to remain more focused on the task at hand.
4.4.8 Qualitative Results
We asked each participant to complete a postexperiment questionnaire. This questionnaire featured five-point Likert scale questions (1 1⁄4 most negative; 5 1⁄4 most positive) to evaluate ease of use, satisfaction level, and intuitiveness for each display condition. The summary results from these ratings, shown in Fig. 13, are difficult to generalize, given our small population size and individual rating systems. In
Fig. 13. Survey response histograms by condition for ease of use (top), satisfaction (middle), and intuitiveness (bottom). Median values for each condition are shown as triangles.
terms of ease of use, median response for LCD (5) was highest, followed by AR (4.5) and HUD (3.5). For rating satisfaction, median response to AR (5) was highest, followed by LCD (4) and HUD (4). For rating intuitiveness, median response to AR (4.5) tied with LCD (4.5), followed by HUD (4).
Fig. 14 (top) depicts the distribution of responses when we asked participants to rank the techniques in order of preferred use. The figure shows four of the six participants ranked the LCD condition first. A Friedman test indicated this was a significant ranking ( 2ð6; 2Þ 1⁄4 7:0; p 1⁄4 0:03). Subsequent pair-wise Wilcoxon tests revealed that LCD was ranked significantly better than HUD (p 1⁄4 0:02). Fig. 14 (bottom) shows the distribution of responses when we asked participants to rank the techniques as to how intuitive they were. This distribution shows four of the six participants ranked the AR condition first. However, a Friedman test indicated this was not a significant ranking ( 2ð6; 2Þ 1⁄4 4:33; p 1⁄4 0:12).
We also asked participants to comment on each display condition. In reviewing the LCD condition, participants were nearly unanimous in their appreciation for the system. For instance, P1 reported “I liked being able to see what I was doing on the screen. I think the screen idea is good, because it doesn’t restrict your light or head movements.” P2 added “It was a lot easier to look at a screen than to have your vision blocked by the popups on the screen,” which offers insights into perceived occlusion issues resulting from virtual content in the AR and HUD conditions. Interestingly, none of the participants


Participant reaction to the HUD condition was over- whelming negative. P1 wrote “My least favorite system because I didn’t know where some things were located in the turret. . . Identification was more difficult for someone not being completely familiar with the turret.” P3 described this experience with HUD as “It wasn’t hard but it was a little confusing and when it got confusing it got frustrating. It took me awhile to find what I was looking for.” Despite the fact that the HUD condition afforded the same visual acuity and freedom of movement as the AR condition, several participants singled out these characteristics only while experiencing the HUD condition. P2 offered “it restricted some of my head movements in the vehicle and the screen was a little dark and made things kind of hard to see.” P4 cited “picture and head clearance” as drawbacks with the HUD condition.
When we asked the participants to list additional technologies that might assist with their roles as mechanics, we received several interesting ideas:
 Fig. 14. Survey response histograms by condition for rankings of most preferred system (top) and most intuitive (bottom).
commented on the disadvantage of having to look back and forth from the target task to the LCD screen. Conversely, several participants actually highlighted the LCD condi- tion’s ability to help them localize. P4 offered “I liked the LCD the most with the program showing me right where the part was, and what tool, without the headgear getting in the way.” P3 confirmed “things were easy to find” with the LCD.
When commenting on the AR condition, the participants offered useful feedback on our choices of visual assistance. In describing the 3D attention-directing arrow, P1 wrote “I enjoyed this system the most . . . was easy to navigate with the tracking red line.” P1 also commented on our use of overlaid virtual models, adding “The 3D image indicators were most satisfying, which allowed for proper item location.” P6 also found the attention-directing graphics of our interface helpful, writing “Prior systems may use over-technical terms that can sometimes be confusing, however this system is directive and simply points. I find that feature extremely helpful.” While echoing these same sentiments about attention-directing graphics, P5 offered additional feedback about the use of animation, “The lines pointing to the objects make it very easy...the animation of the wrench going a different direction, whether tightening or loosening is nice.” P2 found the close-up view helpful in mitigating registration issues when stating “the ‘red line’ takes you right to what your are looking on . . . the only problem I had was the arrow sometimes didn’t point to exactly what I was working on but the close-up view helped sort out any confusion.”
Several participants commented on negative aspects of the AR condition. P3 offered “the red line blocked my line of sight.” P4 described the red 3D arrow as “in the way,” but yielded that the arrow “would help someone who has very little or no experience.” Despite our efforts to control for occlusion by fading the 3D arrow once the mechanic oriented on the target task, these later two comments suggest more careful work is needed to prevent occlusion during localization.
5
1. P1: “Perhaps a device that lets you be able to see using your peripheral vision. . . maybe just use one eye.”
2. P2: “I think a voice activated system would make things easier because it would be completely hands free.”
3. P4: “Better picture quality and smaller head gear.”
4. P5: “Virtual wiring diagram and a hydraulic diagram.”
5. P6: “Perhaps an audio track that gives the instructions
along with the visual aids. I also think if the software could interpret the movements and actions it could acknowledge when the task was completed and give advice.”
LESSONS LEARNED
Our experience with the user study led us to derive the following lessons learned in applying AR to the main- tenance and repair domain:
AR can reduce the time required to locate a task. A statistically significant result showed the AR display condition allowed mechanics to locate tasks more quickly than when using the LCD condition (representing an improved version of the IETMs currently employed in practice).
AR can reduce head and neck movements during a repair. An additional statistically significant result of the study showed that the AR display condition allowed mechanics to experience less head translation and rotation than the LCD display condition during task localization. Descriptive statistics show that, in general, subjects experi- encing the AR condition also required smaller ranges of head movement. These results highlight an ability to potentially reduce overall musculoskeletal workloads and strain related to head movement during maintenance tasks. However, more work is required to reconcile strain reductions resulting from less movement with the added strain of wearing a HWD. A technique proposed by Tu ̈ mler et al. [36], which uses heart rate variability to measure strain, could be useful for this analysis.
More emphasis is needed on workpiece activities. The user study revealed a lack of statistical separation between the overall mean tasks completion times for the AR and LCD display conditions. We suspect this can be improved by further developing the AR assistance offered during the


workpiece portion of maintenance tasks. As described in Section 3, activities in this phase require visual information supporting such actions as adjustment, alignment, and detection. While we did provide some alignment and routing information (e.g., content showing the position and movements of select tools and turret components), this was common to both AR and LCD. Future work should examine specific visual aids rendered in AR to promote these workpiece activities.
Mechanics may be willing to tolerate shortcomings with HWD technology if the HWD provides value. Despite the disadvantage of wearing a bulky, relatively low-resolution prototype VST HWD with fixed focus cameras, and a narrow FOV, participants rated the AR condition at least as favorably as LCD in terms of satisfaction and intuitiveness. While some participants acknowledged the visibility constraints experienced while using AR, they tempered this critique with appreciation for the assistance it offered.
Mechanics are sensitive to occlusions caused by aug- mented content. As described in the user comments in Section 4.4.8, several of the same mechanics who praised the effectiveness of AR visuals were also bothered when the same content occluded a task being performed. We suspect that this trade-off between the positive and negative aspects of overlaid AR content is likely related to the experience- level of the individual mechanic. Future AR applications in this domain should tailor AR content to address the needs of each individual mechanic. Likewise, applications should adopt a “do no harm” rule of thumb, and limit any assistance to only what is required. Where possible, AR applications should include interaction techniques to allow mechanics to easily dismiss content once it is no longer needed (e.g., labels) and control the speed of “fade-away” animations (e.g., our red 3D attention-directing arrow).
6 CONCLUSIONS
We described a research prototype AR application for maintaining and repairing a portion of a military vehicle, and presented the results of a controlled user study with professional mechanics in a field setting. The AR applica- tion allowed mechanics to locate individual tasks in a maintenance sequence more quickly than when using an improved version of currently employed methods. The prototype AR application also resulted in mechanics making fewer overall head movements during task locali- zation and was favorably received by study participants in terms of intuitiveness and satisfaction.
We were especially encouraged to achieve these results with a population of professionally trained mechanics working in a field setting, who expressed support for our approach. In the future, we plan to conduct a similar evaluation with an improved prototype in an effort to determine whether additional benefits can be provided by AR in the workpiece portion of maintenance and repair tasks.