HANDHELD AUGMENTED REALITY IN CIVIL ENGINEERING
Gerhard Schall
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision Graz University of Technology, Austria Email: schall@icg.tugraz.at
URL: http://www.icg.tu-graz.ac.at/Members/schall
Abstract: This paper presents an overview of a project focusing on research on the next-generation field information system for utility companies, providing mobile workforces with capabilities for on-site inspection and planning. For achieving this aim, handheld Augmented Reality technology is used for on-site visualization of geometric and semantic attributes of geospatial 3D models on the user’s handheld device. The project aims at providing a fully functional handheld Augmented Reality device for utility field workers. A software solution that can visualize registered three-dimensional underground models in real time has been developed. Registration in 3D requires being able to perform accurate global localization and posing tracking in real time without relying on unrealistic assumptions concerning prior scene knowledge. The generation of such three-dimensional underground models will be discussed as well as an overview of the fields of application will be given.
1. INTRODUCTION
The application fields of Augmented Reality (AR) for spatial problems are very broad and include areas such as navigation, enviromental planning and archItectural visualizations. We use AR as a novel user interface for accurately superimposing registered three-dimensional models over the real-world view. Furthermore, geospatial information plays an important role in todays societies. By the widespreadness of mobile devices, which are already equipped with positional and orientational sensors, location based services become reality. This is visible in applications for interactive street maps or applications for pedestrian navigation. Utility companies in charge of underground infrastructure such as electricity or telecommunication lines rely on geographic information systems (GIS) to manage their assets. Field workers of utility companies aiming to locate particular items of the underground infrastructure, for example, structures scheduled for maintenance, need to refer to the data in the GIS while in the field. The established way to deliver the data outdoors is through plotted paper plans. Moreover, there is a certain trend from 2D-GIS towards 3D-GIS to provide more realistic representation of the geospatial assets. Unlike common approaches of locating hidden utility assets by means of paper maps or mobile GIS solutions, Vidente conveys
  
the underground network information directly in three dimensions employing an egocentric view. Users no longer have to transform map space into the real world since they obtain an integrated view of both at a time. The next sections will discuss the evolution of devices for AR followed by an introduction to the research project Vidente, which aims at developing an innovative AR prototype for real-time visualization of underground infrastructure used by utilities.
2 HANDHELD AUGMENTED REALITY
In recent years mobile AR has experienced a transformation from bulky setups [1] towards more user-accepted handheld systems. Figure 1 shows the evolution of AR systems based on devices such as Ultra Mobile PCs (UMPC), PDAs or smart phones [9], [2]. The increasing availability of AR on such consumer platforms and the technology’s capability of enhancing real-world vision with graphical representations of hidden objects and abstract information make it a powerful tool to assist field personnel of utility and infrastructure companies in accomplishing common field tasks more efficiently.
Figure 1: Evolution of Augmented Reality systems: „Backpack“-AR system, Ultra-Mobile PC, PDA, smart phone (ltr)
For Vidente we employ a handheld AR device built around an Ultra Mobile PC (Sony VAIO UX1) mounted on a special handheld frame equipped with joystick-like controls for user interaction (Figure 2, [11]).
Figure 2: Lightweight AR device designed for outdoor use and delivering field workers an augmented view with geospatial content
      
Using a UMPC as the core unit of our setup allows for a completely self-contained system providing sufficient computing power for three-dimensional graphics and several hours of battery-powered operation in the field. For position tracking, we use GPS enhanced with satellite-based correction data by EGNOS (European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service). However, this usually only allows for a horizontal position accuracy of about 5–10 m whereas a level of accuracy of about 15 cm is preferable for Vidente to permit meaningful visualizations. As part of ongoing research the integration of terrestrial correction data services (DGPS / RTK-GPS) as well as on the integration of vision-based tracking approaches are considered to leverage the required cm-accuracy [3].
3. VIDENTE – A LOCATION-AWARE HANDHELD AUGMENTED REALITY SYSTEM
First attemps towards visualization of underground infrastructure using AR was made by Roberts [5]. Vidente aims at development of an outdoor handheld augmented reality system providing users with an intuitive visualization of the local underground network infrastructure in their immediate environs (Figure 3, [10]). The Vidente handheld client implements the video see-through metaphor. Hence, scenes are assembled at the client device in real-time by merging continuously streamed video footage with geo-referenced computer graphics considering the client’s currently tracked position and orientation. Consequently, the rendered AR scenes are adjusted continuously as the user moves around.
Figure 3: Field worker using the Vidente system for visualization of underground infrastructure in 3D, which is superimposed on the video stream in real-time
Vidente enables users to visualize both hidden underground objects such as cables, pipes and joins and abstract information such as legal boundaries or safety buffers. Corresponding semantic object data may be queried, as well. Buried assets projected at the office can be taken out to the field to be matched against the real-world situation.
        
Vidente’s x-ray vision permits rapid perception of complex subsurface network layouts. Spots of interest can be virtually marked employing an annotation tool for redlining. The full range of tools available in Vidente is described in detail in Schall et al. [8]. Figure 4 gives a system overview of Vidente. The mobile AR client querries a geospatial database with the handheld ́s GPS position to retrieve data corresponding to the current location.
Figure 4: Envisioned system: export of data from the GIS server to the mobile AR client through a Web Feature Service. The service delivers XML encoded Geography Markup Language documents, which are translated into 3D scene graph on the client side
Then, a multi-stage data translation pipeline is used for generating three-dimensional models of the underground infrastructure from geospatial objects originating from an operational geospatial database (GE Smallworld) which are delivered to the client application in offline mode. The client application converts the delivered geospatial data into a corresponding three-dimensional computer graphics data structure – a context- sensitive scene graph, which is also capable of storing semantic object information explained in Mendez et al. [2]. A detailed description of our data translation pipeline is given in Schall et al. [7].
3. FIELDS OF APPLICATION
The Vidente application, that is responsible for visualization and interaction with the geospatial models, is running on the AR plattform. The basis software consists of Studierstube1, one of the most powerful frameworks for Augmented Reality.
For visualization and 3D interaction with geospatial data numerous tools have been implemented [6], [7]. Generally, depth perception is a critical topic, because the underground infrastructure models are rendered ontop of the video stream. Therefore, appropriate approaches are necesarry to improve the user ́s perception, such as a virtual excavation hole depicted in Figure 5 (left). This provides a spatial overview of complex underground infrastructure in three dimensions. Figure 6 shows a tool to querry
1 www.studierstube.org
  
attributes of geospatial models. Another tool, the Snapshot-Tool, shown in Figure 7 proved useful during the evaluations with field workers in tasks such as documentation and collaboration. In the following, possible application areas of Vidente are listed:
• Trench inspection tasks (e. g. guidance for gas leak detection)
• Planning and preparation of digging activities on site (e. g. assisting with spray
marking)
• Visual guidance while digging (e. g. by means of a dashboard mounted AR device in a shovel excavator telling the operator where to dig in real-time)
• Locating of damaged buried cables
• On-site verification of assets projected at the office
• On-site correction of legacy datasets
• Assistance for operation and maintenance works
• Mobile Mapping
Figure 5: A virtual excavation in which the buried assets are perceived in all three dimensions Figure 6: Metadata query tool to select and view meta information of geospatial content Figure 7: Snapshot of the augmented live video
4. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK
An overview of current developments in handheld Augmented Reality in civil engineering was given. Furthermore, a location- and context-aware handheld AR system was presented, which addresses the workflow optimisation of common field tasks with utilities. By means of a more intuitive way of information conveying remarkable time saving can be achieved employing such a system. Potential fields of application were outlined. A first fully functional prototype of our handheld AR system Vidente is available and provides a set of tools for direct user interaction with the presented information on buried utility assets. Further improvements will focus on advanced global tracking using DGPS / RTK-GPS employing terrestrial correction data services while keeping an ergonomically acceptable form factor.