HYDROSYS - first approaches towards on-site monitoring and management with handhelds
Eduardo Veas, Ernst Kruijff, Erick Mendez
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision Graz University of Technology (veas@icg.tugraz.at)
Abstract: HYDROSYS is a project targeted at improving monitoring and understanding of environmental processes and their management. The project introduces innovative concepts of on-site monitoring and event-driven campaigns. It builds an infrastructure that promotes synergy across user groups both on-site and at the workplace. This publication introduces initial steps towards defining on-site monitoring and an infrastructure to support it.
Keywords: Environmental information; sensor networks, handheld devices, spatial analysis. 1. INTRODUCTION
HYDROSYS is geared towards analysing environmental processes where they truly happen, in the field. Currently, there is a large gap between the work done in the field and that done in the office when analysing environmental processes. Environmental monitoring can be defined as the process of observing continuously and measuring regularly environmental parameters of a specific area in order to identify environmental changes and aid the decision making process related to the site. In that context, on site environmental monitoring comprises all activities that are done in the field such as identifying key variables of the problem, taking measures, data and images communication, understanding the site as a whole, and validation of a technical solution in order to optimize the management of natural areas. At all times, it is important to understand that on-site monitoring is not replacing nor can it be replaced by remote monitoring: it is a complementary task.
By advancing the state-of-the-art in on-site monitoring and management tools, the project aims at achieving greater synergy among users. A real situation will illustrate potential advantages of on-site monitoring and the HYDROSYS toolset. In summer 2008, cantonal administration received an extreme rainfall warning from MeteoSuisse for the Dranses catchment. They asked all cantonal natural hazards experts to stay at the headquarters in Sion and inform municipalities of this warning. During the event, cantonal experts analysed data coming from sensing stations. They asked through mobile or radio onsite observers to describe the situation, informed municipalities and tried to set up a coordinative effort with local municipalities. However, they were “blind” and could only consult the workplace data of the area. Cantonal experts asked the person on-site to give his or her opinion and to take some measures in order to quantify risks. After the natural disaster happened, cantonal experts asked the onsite observer to show them the event and to take some measures in order to quantify it. Cantonal experts in conjunction with local experts and municipalities sent guidelines and actions to the on-site observer to coordinate onsite actions.
Based on this real example, on site monitoring and HYDROSYS technology will develop communication and exchange methods (e.g. images, data, graphs) from an on-site observer to decision makers who are generally at workplace and vice versa. In fact, end users:
• will have a better view of the global situation before, during and after an event with the
image transmission and overlay techniques.
• will save time and money doing onsite and online analysis
• will have a better visualization of the field when they are in office or headquarters

On-site monitoring tools do not replace any work carried out by the engineering companies but give additional information at a higher temporal resolution. It is important to state is that the decision-making process will not be automated in HYDROSYS, but happens "in the head" of the user, helped by sensor readings. This publication describes the basic technical framework, gives a short application example and introduces the envisioned visualization of environmental data in the field.
2. RELATED WORK
Currently, environmental monitoring is mostly done by an on-site observer, few expensive sensing stations with data logger (e. g. IFKIS network in Switzerland) and a Geographical Information System (GIS). With this current approach, many processes cannot be monitored. Sensor data is still (timely) limited and scattered in the environment: even when a problem is detected by a sensor, it can often not be traced back directly, since detailed information on the area is missing. As a result, many processes are badly understood and both their representation (including the physical process model) and their visualization are incomplete [Barrenetxea et al, 2008]. Moreover, current sensing stations have several limitations, such as no real time data and few spatial coverage, expensive cost, etc. In hydrology, for example, there have been only limited field campaigns with in-situ spatial observations [Barrenetxea et al, 2008]. In that context, being able to capture spatial and temporal variability of environmental parameters, to develop real-time image and data transmission [Shin, 2007] and data visualization in order to enhance environmental model, prediction tool and decision making process will be the next challenge in environmental monitoring [Bogue, 2008]. Therefore, current trends are moving toward deploying a large number of wireless sensing stations in order to provide high spatial and temporal density measurement. Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) [Aberer et al, (2007), Chong & Kumar (2003)] have become a widespread tool for monitoring a wide range of environmental phenomena. Many research projects are investigating possible applications of sensor networks ranging from habitat monitoring [Szewcszyk et al, 2004] to agriculture [Langendoen et al, 2006] and to environmental monitoring [Selavo et al, 2007; Werner- Allen et al, 2005]. However, deploying a WSN in the field has always been reported as a difficult task and remains challenging [Barrenetxea et al, 2008].
3. APPLICATION SCENARIOS
Several application scenarios have been chosen as test cases for HYDROSYS. They are based on sites of interest in Switzerland (La Fouly, Gemsstock, Dorfberg) and Finland (Ridalinpuro and Kylmäoja) each emphasizing different aspects of the system.
La Fouly
This scenario aims at providing good quality data to model hydrological processes in steep alpine catchments. The data will feed a 3D, distributed and physically based hydrological model reproducing processes, such as infiltration and redistribution of soil moisture, water runoff, darcian subsurface flows, evapotranspiration, snow and ice melting. Results from distributed input will be compared to those obtained from a single meteorological station to investigate the relevance of geospatial variability in watershed modeling.
Gemsstock
In the Alps generally permafrost can occur at altitudes above 2400 m. Increasing temperatures in rock faces and ice filled fissures can have major impact on ground stability causing damage to infrastructure in these areas (such as cable car pylons and stations) affecting their usability. Deformations on buildings/pylons have to be surveyed accurately and regularly by an expert (e.g. engineering companies). The new tool would be applied on a daily/weekly basis to visualize onsite deformation rates and to receive feedback on the stability of the infrastructure. The onsite monitoring tool does not replace any work carried out by the engineering companies but would give additional information on deformations at a higher temporal resolution and could be carried out by the people working onsite. Dorfberg
Wet snow avalanches are hazards of high importance showing up with a high frequency and a high degree of potential damage to infrastructure in mountainous regions. So far the processes which cause the formation and triggering of wet snow avalanches are poorly

investigated. With steep slopes and its southwards aspect Dorfberg is a good place for doing wet snow avalanche research. In recent years many small wet snow avalanches, which occur on a quite regular frequency and also some big events have been monitored in the area.
Ridalinpuro
Ridalinpuro is a small area, which is currently being studied and constructed according to the principles of environmentally sensitive hydraulic engineering. There is good data from the site and it is (e.g., already equipped with v-notch weirs). The measurement campaigns on Ridalinpuro site will investigate the impact of land use change on urban runoff and the effect and pollution abatement efficiency of the environmentally sensitive hydraulic structures that are being built on parts of the site.
Kylmäoja
Kylmäoja is a larger urban catchment, which is experiencing pressure from human activities. The hydrological and hydraulic data that is available from Kylmäoja is limited. The measurement campaigns on Kylmäoja will investigate the impact of land cover, construction, and other human activities on water quantity and quality. The construction of the logistic centre in the upper part of the catchment and the activities on the major airport that is partly on the catchment make Kylmäoja a suitable site for the study.
4. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
The following use case attempts to clear HYDROSYS tools can be utilized. It also provides some hints as to how the system components relate:
Silvia arrives at La Fouly, a site where she means to analyse water discharge. Upon arrival, she starts her “hydrology researcher” profile, which allows her to visualize continuos data from sensors. While going through the site, she often points her handheld at the environment, on the screen she sees a live video feed overlaid with precipitation levels from the day before and current moisture maps, taking notes. At some point, a message from Vincent tells her that some sensors are no longer in the appropriate position. She brings up her “sensor specialist” profile, which allows her to visualize sensors and their status, screening out all readings. She switches to a map view and finds Vincent’s location, when turning towards him, on handheld screen she can already see the failing sensor, and the displacement from the appropriate location, they set about to fix the sensor....
In the use case, a team of users is working on a site. The data about the site spans several activities and every user may access data that is important for them. This data can come from continuous sources or from static ones, processed previously. In any case there is a flow of data coming from these sources, being processed and then visualized by users. The following diagram shows the overall connectivity of high level components in HYDROSYS. Each of these components performs a specific task for the system, and they are not necessarily executed concurrently or in the same computer.
Figure 1. Software architecture diagram
Data is generated and pushed into the sensor network by the Sensors and Blimp component. Common sensors include sensorscope stations, temperature, moisture and
 
water discharge sensors and a blimp that produces textured models of the environment. Simulation and Warning: acts just as another sensor performing all the simulation tasks of the project. It reads sensor data from GSN and outputs results to it. GSN is a distributed sensor network that stores and propagates data during field work. Static Sources are a data source separate from GSN, providing mainly DEM/DTM and other legacy data. All these data sources form a rich information space that is accessed by HYDROSYS. The Smart Client component is a negotiator for data. It gathers information based on user needs and preferences (stored in a profile). It also prepares information in a form that can be efficiently handled by mobile devices, performing appropriate conversions (reducing data, preparing 3D models, filtering information) for each platform. Interaction and Graphics leverages advanced visualization techniques to render and overlay views of the data depending on the user’s location. It enables interaction through visual controls and communication tools. Interaction and graphics needs to accurately know the pose (position and orientation) of the user in order to correctly overlay information. Tracking provides pose information to mobile devices. It is a hybrid solution supported on multiple devices and techniques. The visualization component also requires a view of the real world which is obtained from the Video component.
5. SENSORS
HYDROSYS creates a rich information space integrating diverse sensors and information sources. Multivariate sensors and sensor stations are available that potentially provide around 20 different kinds of environmental sensor readings. Environmental sensors are directly related to case study and location.
Beside environmental sensors, multiple cameras are part of a multi-camera framework for sensing and reconstruction purposes, including a camera supported on a pan-tilt unit for remote sensing. The latter can be remotely controlled by panning-tilting in the desired direction. User devices hold cameras that can also be considered part of the camera framework and used to share viewpoints on the location. Additionally, an unmanned aerial vehicle (blimp) can be used with two cameras, a normal range and a thermal camera. The blimp will provide a live, up to date surface model of the ground in the form of a height map, temperature map and colour map. The blimp will be flown prior to the initial experiment in order to generate a high precision height which will be optimized off-line. This model will be used during the live experiments. The model will then be refined in an off-line step, from the experimental data, making topographic data at different times available. The combination of these sensors generates highly detailed data for the site at hand, improving the performance for on-site monitoring tasks.
6. INTERACTION AND GRAPHICS
One advantage of on-site monitoring is the fact that the actual site, not some probably outdated model of it, is available to the user. A challenge for the tools developed by HYDROSYS is to exploit this fact, relating synthetic data to the real world and attempting to convey as much information as possible without loosing the real world context.
The technique used to merge real world views with synthetic data, known as augmented reality (AR), allows the user to walk around and observe the environment, continuously getting a “correct view” on the sensor data. The task of augmented reality is to render computer generated artefacts correctly registered with the real world in real time. The term “correctly registered” means that these artefacts must appear in the appropriate position relative to the point of view of the user. One can imagine two layers, one with a video background and another one where the system renders graphical information and which is overlaid on top of the first one. The term real time often means that these overlays must be generated at least at 15 frames per second to give the human eye a sense of coherence.

 Figure 2. Example of augmented reality techniques to overlay data in the real world
Interaction and Graphics is responsible to present data to the users in a format that helps them better understand it and relate it to the real world, and to provide tools navigate, modify the data and behaviour of the system. The challenges in this area have to do with presenting graphics in small screens, avoiding visual clutter, conveying information correctly as well as proposing an intuitive interaction metaphor for handheld devices.
6.1. Visualization
SensorScope and other sensing stations measure key environmental data such as air temperature and humidity, surface temperature, incoming solar radiation, wind speed and direction, precipitation, soil moisture and water suction and so on. The measured information comes in a numerical form or even perhaps as voltage readings. The raw presentation of said numerical information is unsuitable as the cognitive load of understanding the readings is too high. Instead, hydrologists conventionally use mathematical software to display the abstract information delivered by the sensors on a more human readable form, often as plotted graphs. AR visualization requires several sets of 3D models: sensor readings in graphical form, digital terrain models (DTM), glyphs for known objects (such as other users in the field). The traditional pipeline for generating interactive graphics based on sensor data is the following: Given a set of sensor readings, the system generates polygons with corresponding values associated to them. These values may represent colors, hues, brightness, and other visual properties. These polygons are generated on the location given by the context data of the sensor. All sensor stations, and simulation results will provide data that is already geo-referenced and directly useable for the generation of visualizations.
Figure 3. Example of heterogeneous data and visualization forms.
Sensor data can have different visualization forms, that all have their specific advantages and disadvantages to interpret the data. The current way we intend to interact with sensor data layers is organized by browsing through the different visualization modes.
Focus + Context
When visualizing large amounts of information scattered around a site, it is sometimes important for the system to direct the attention of the user to possible areas of interest. There exist several techniques to achieve this such as distorting the image, overlaying conspicuous artefacts or modifying the visual properties of the scene. Of particular interest are those that modify the image’s saliency, this is, the property of certain parts of an image to attract the user’s attention more than others. During the course of the project, several
 
techniques will be applied and experimented with including filtering, depth perception, explosions, and others.
Figure 4. Directing the attention to particular sensor readings in the scene, by distortion, overlay and saliency modification.
6.2. Interaction
Interaction covers several issues ranging from the hardware devices to the user interface. The tasks related to hardware devices insure the platform is appropriate for AR. While those related to software user interfaces introduce means to operate and modify the behaviour of the system.
Handheld display system construction
The UMPC is one of HYDROSYS target lightweight devices. It is a fully featured personal computer for mobile use but still it has some strict limitations for usage as AR platform. UMPCs often need to be extended with sensors and controllers even when the UMPCs already contain such sensors. It is a matter of the quality required by AR applications that is addressed by additional sensors (high framerate and high resolution camera, high resolution and low error GPS, gyroscopes). A device aimed at AR applications enabling hardware extensions in an ergonomic, usable manner has been presented in [Veas and Kruijff 2008]. A new version of this device was tested with end-users in Finland (see Figure 4).
Figure 5. New construction used by Finnish end-users in the field (Nummela site)
User Interfaces for environmental monitoring with handhelds
In order to accommodate the front-end for the different actions, HYDROSYS will provide a componentized user interface kit. A higher level user interface (UI) toolkit (the widget toolkit) and a set of navigation techniques form the core upon which task-specific interfaces are based.
• AR user interface toolkit: The user interface toolkit consists of the widget toolkit, which offers higher level user interface elements like layers, forms, buttons, sliders, and so on. The widget toolkit focuses on data organization and visualization adaptation for complex spatial data sets to accommodate for the different hardware platforms. Information is organized in layers, for example accommodating a layer for each different type of data. Multiple layers are stacked on top of each other with the video image and DEM at the bottom. The user performs specific actions on layers to improve the visual quality of the overall interface, for example to avoid visual clutter. Such actions include blending layers in or out, or performing modifications on the rendered data or video image to advance readability. Reorganizing layers up or down the stack allows more important data to be rendered on top of contextual data, aiding the users in visualizing directly what they are most interested in. These techniques help users
  
.
to customize their viewpoint on data. This has considerable perceptual and cognitive advantages. Certain techniques can potentially be related to the focus+context techniques being developed to improve the perceptual quality of the visualization
• Interfaces: these are extension modules aimed at specific tasks including sensor placement, simulations, collaboration. The sensor placement interface module supports planning and setting up sensor networks. The data produced by the sensors can be accessed through the data retrieval module that basically is the data selection front-end to the global sensor network (GSN). Users can perform simulations by using a simulation module to select data sets and simulation scripts. Finally, users can communicate, annotate and share data using collaboration tools. Most of these modules are integrated in the base interface, the interface used at the workplace, extended with functionality that enables users to plan a site and setup a campaign, and to perform post onsite analysis.
Figure 6. Different layers used in the AR visualization
 Navigation and Viewpoint Change
The main factor exploited by Augmented Reality is that the application relies on the user’s sense of orientation for visual understanding of the data presented. Navigation techniques associated with changes in viewpoint are included as aids for exploration of complex spatial datasets. Changing viewpoints using external cameras is a technique enabled by the characteristics of HYDROSYS deployment, having several cameras in the field, observing the location of interest from different viewpoints. At this point, it should be stated that one of the cameras being deployed is a pan-tilt unit. Using a simple front-end, users will be able to control the orientation of this camera. Similarly, users will be able to select a “hovering” spot for the blimp, to get a specific exocentric viewpoint of the site.
5. CONCLUSIONS
Aided by modern sensing technologies HYDROSYS extends current practice by enabling on-site data collection and visualization and supporting multidisciplinary teams of users in the sharing of their results. The project also provides a tool with which short-term events can be studied with appropriate detail.
Hydrosys leverages and advances state-of-the-art technologies in different disciplines from highly heterogeneous sensor networks, outdoor hybrid tracking, mobile augmented reality, image processing, down to the test case scenarios in alpine and nordic locations. The challenges that the project faces are manyfold, integration of these technologies being among the most crucial ones. Validation of proposed visualization and interaction techniques follows user studies to determine cognitive load of different techniques, the level of understanding achieved, intuitiveness of interaction and several other perceptual factors. These human factors, which are present in all systems, are stressed by the extreme conditions presented by HYDROSYS (small screens, large heterogeneous datasets, uncomfortable controllers, etc.). HYDROSYS will address these and other challenges at appropriate levels to insure the innovative advantages introduced by on-site monitoring can be achieved.
