Does not existe a single and unique definition of artificial intelligence. Therefore, it is logical to present the most widely used ones. In the following table, the given definitions are organized in two dimensions. The definitions on top are related to thinking processes and reasoning, in contrast to those on the bottom which address behaviour. Furthermore, the definitions on the left measure success in terms of fidelity to human performance, whereas the definitions on the right measure rationality, a success compared to ideal performance. It is important to note that a system is only rational, if it does the “right thing”, given its knowledge.

 	Humanly	Rationally
Thinking	
“The exciting new effort to make computers
think ... machines with minds, in full
and literal sense.” (Haugeland, 1985)

“[The automation of] activities that we
associate with human thinking, such as
decision-making, problem solving,
learning...” (Bellman, 1978)
“The study of mental faculties
through the use of computational
models.”
(Charniak and McDermott, 1985)

“The study of the computations
that make it possible to
perceive, reason, and act.”
(Winston, 1992)
Acting	
“The art of creating machines that
perform functions that require
intelligence when performed by
people.” (Kurzweil, 1990)

“The study of how to make computers do
things at which, at the moment, people
are better.” (Rich and Knight, 1991)
“Computational Intelligence
is the study of the design
of intelligent agents.”
(Poole et at, 1998)

“Al ... is concerned with
intelligent behaviour in
artefacts.” (Nilsson, 1998)
Table 1 – Definitions of artificial intelligence, organized into four categories (from Artificial Intelligence: A modern approach)

Table 1 presents four approaches, all of which have been followed and developed throughout the history, usually by different scientists using different methods. A human-centred approach must be in part an empirical science, involving observations and hypotheses about human behaviour. A rationalist approach involves a combination of mathematics and engineering.